---
layout: docs
title: How Clients authenticate
---

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Some examples** **](#some-examples-)
* [Basic Authentication for dummies](#basic-authentication-for-dummies)
* [Authentication Token](#authentication-token)
    * [Suggested way to check credentials and obtain user’s roles](#suggested-way-to-check-credentials-and-obtain-users-roles)
* [How to avoid the basic authentication popup in browsers](#how-to-avoid-the-basic-authentication-popup-in-browsers)

## Introduction

Clients authenticate passing credentials via the standard [basic
authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_access_authentication),
a standard method for an HTTP user agent to provide a *username* and
*password* when making a request.

RESTHeart is *stateless*: there isn't any authentication session and
credentials must be sent on every request.

## Some examples** ** 

With **[httpie](https://github.com/jkbrzt/httpie)** use the -a option:

``` text
 http -a userid:password GET 127.0.0.1:8080/
```

With **curl**, use the –user options

``` text
curl -i --user userid:password -X GET 127.0.0.1:8080/
```

## Basic Authentication for dummies

Basic Authentication requires the client to send its credentials with
the **Authorization** request header.

The value of the *Authorization* request header must be:** Basic
base64(&lt;userid&gt; + ':' + &lt;password&gt;)**

In other words:

1.  userid and password are combined into a string "userid:password".
    **Note** the colon between userid and password (userid cannot
    contain the ":" character).
2.  The resulting string is base 64 encoded
3.  The string "Basic " (**note** the space) is then put before the
    encoded string.

## Authentication Token

If a request is successfully authenticated, an authentication token is
generated by RESTHeart and included in every subsequent responses.

**Following requests can either use the password or the auth token.**

Authentication Token

The authentication token is used as a temporary password in the basic
authentication scheme. This means that the *Authorization* request
header can either be calculated from the password and the Auth-Token
itself:

`Authorization: Basic base64(<userid> + ':' + <password>) or Authorization: Basic base64(<userid> + ':' + <auth-token>)`

Auth token information are passed in the following response headers:

``` text
Auth-Token: 6a81d622-5e24-4d9e-adc0-e3f7f2d93ac7
Auth-Token-Location: /_authtokens/user@si.com
Auth-Token-Valid-Until: 2015-04-16T13:28:10.749Z
```

**Note** the URI in the Auth-Token-Location header: the client can issue
a GET request to obtain information about token or a DELETE request to
invalidate it. Of course clients can only request their own tokens
(otherwise response code will be 403 Forbidden).

The Authentication Token is a very important feature when you are
developing a web application. Since every request needs to include the
credentials, you need to store them either in a cookie or (better) in
the session storage. The sign-in form can check the credentials using
the actual password; if it succeeds, the auth token can be stored and
used.

Pay attention to the authentication token in case of multi-node
deployments (horizontal scalability). In this case, you need to either
disable it or use a load balancer with the sticky session option or use
a distributed auth token cache implementation (not yet available in the
current version but you can ask
for [support](http://restheart.org/support.html)).

The auth token are controlled by the following configuration options:

``` text
auth-token-enabled: true
auth-token-ttl: 15 # time to live after last read, in minutes
```

### Suggested way to check credentials and obtain user’s roles

The default configuration file sets up the useful GetRoleHandler, bound
to `/_logic/roles/<userid>`

The possible respose codes of the request GET `/_logic/roles/<userid>`
are:

-   **401 Unauthorized** =&gt; missing or wrong credentials
-   **403 Forbidden**, the *userid* in the URL does not match the one in
    the *Authorization* header
-   **200 OK** credentials match; the following response document is
    sent back:

``` json
 {
    "_embedded": {}, 
    "_links": {
        "self": {
            "href": "/_logic/roles/user@si.com"
        }
    }, 
    "authenticated": true, 
    "roles": [
        "USER"
    ]
}
```

Of course, if the request succeeds, the client gets back the auth token
as well.

It is easy to check the user credentials from a login form with this
handler: in case the client getd back 200, they match and the auth token
can be stored for furhter request; otherwise passed credentials are
wrong.

## How to avoid the basic authentication popup in browsers

With basic authentication, browsers can show a awful login popup window
and this is not what you usually want.

What happens behind the scene, is that the server sends
the `WWW-Authenticate` response header that actually leads to it. 

You can avoid RESTHeart to actually send this header avoiding the popup
login window altogether, either specifying
the `No-Auth-Challenge` request header or using
the `noauthchallenge` query parameter. In this case, RESTHeart will just
respond with **401 Unauthorized** in case of missing or wrong
credentials.

This feature together with the authentication token, allows you to
implement a form based authentication experience on top of the simple
and effective basic authentication mechanism. You can refer to the [blog
example
application](https://github.com/softinstigate/restheart-blog-example) for
an example of such implementation.

**  
**
