---
title: Authentication
layout: docs
---

<div markdown="1" class="d-none d-xl-block col-xl-2 order-last bd-toc">

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
-   [Authentication Mechanisms](#authentication-mechanisms)
    -   [JWT Authentication](#jwt-authentication)
    -   [Basic Authentication](#basic-authentication)
    -   [Avoid browsers to open the login popup window](#avoid-browsers-to-open-the-login-popup-window)
    -   [Digest Authentication](#digest-authentication)
    -   [Token Authentication](#token-authentication)
    -   [Identity Authentication](#identity-authentication)
-   [Authenticators](#authenticators)
    -   [Mongo Realm Authenticator](#mongo-realm-authenticator)
    -   [File Realm Authenticator](#file-realm-authenticator)
-   [Token Managers](#token-managers)
    -   [Random Token Manager](#random-token-manager)

</div>
<div markdown="1" class="col-12 col-md-9 col-xl-8 py-md-3 bd-content">

{% include docs-head.html %}

## Introduction

See [Security Overview](/docs/security/overview) for an high level view of the RESTHeart security model.

**RESTHeart** is built around a **pluggable architecture**. It comes with a strong security implementation but you can easily extend it by implementing plugins. This section documents the authentication plugins available out-of-the-box. You can also develop your own authentication plugins.

## Authentication Mechanisms

### JWT Authentication

JWT Authentication manages the authentication following the <a href="https://jwt.io" target="_blank">JSON Web Token standard</a>.

The token is verified against the configured `issuer` and `audience` and according to the specified `algorithm`.

Supported algorithms are the HMAC256, HMAC384, HMAC512, RSA256, RSA384, RSA512.

For HMAC the `key` configuration option specifies the secret, for RSA the public key.

```yml
auth-mechanisms:
    jwtAuthenticationMechanism:
        enabled: true
        algorithm: HS256
        key: secret
        base64Encoded: false
        usernameClaim: sub
        rolesClaim: roles
        fixedRoles:
    #      - admin
        issuer: myIssuer
        audience: myAudience
```

It's not possible to set both `rolesClaim` and `fixedRoles`

### Basic Authentication

**BasicAuthMechanism** manages the Basic Authentication method, where the client credentials are sent via the `Authorization` request header using the format `Authorization: Basic base64(id:pwd)`. The configuration allows specifying the Authenticator that will be used to verify the credentials.

```yml
auth-mechanisms:
    basicAuthMechanism:
        enabled: true
        authenticator: fileRealmAuthenticator
```

### Avoid browsers to open the login popup window

The Basic and Digest Authentication protocols requires responding with a challenge when the request cannot be authenticated as follows:

```
WWW-Authenticate: Basic realm="RESTHeart Realm"
WWW-Authenticate: Digest realm="RESTHeart Realm",domain="localhost",nonce="Toez71bBUPoNMTU0NDAwNDMzNjEwMXBY+Jp7YX/GVMcxAd61FpY=",opaque="00000000000000000000000000000000",algorithm=MD5,qop="auth"
```

In browsers this leads to the login popup windows. In our web applications we might want to redirect to a fancy login page when the 401 Unauthorized response code.

To avoid the popup window just add to the request the `noauthchallenge` query parameter or the header `No-Auth-Challenge`. This will skip the challenge response.

### Digest Authentication

**DigestAuthMechanism** manages the Digest Authentication method. The configuration allows specifying the Authenticator that will be used to verify the credentials.

```yml
auth-mechanisms:
    digestAuthMechanism:
        enabled: true
        realm: RESTHeart Realm
        domain: localhost
        authenticator: fileRealmAuthenticator
```

### Token Authentication

**TokenBasicAuthMechanism** manages the Basic Authentication method with the actual password replaced by the auth token generated by **RESTHeart**, i.e. the client credentials are sent via the `Authorization` request header using the format `Authorization: Basic base64(id:auth-token)`. It requires a Token Manager to be configured (eg. RndTokenManager).

```yml
auth-mechanisms:
    tokenBasicAuthMechanism:
        enabled: true
```

### Identity Authentication

**IdentityAuthMechanism** just authenticates any request building an [BaseAccount](https://github.com/SoftInstigate/restheart/blob/master/security/src/main/java/io/RESTHeart/plugins/authentication/impl/BaseAccount.java) with the _username_ and _roles_ specified in the configuration. Useful for testing purposes. Note that enabling this causes the _DigestAuthMechanism_ to fail, you cannot use both.

```yml
auth-mechanisms:
    identityAuthMechanism:
        enabled: false
        username: admin
        roles:
        - admin
        - user
```

{: .bs-callout.bs-callout-info }
Watch [Authentication mechanisms](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVk0aboHayM&t=342s)

## Authenticators

### Mongo Realm Authenticator

_mongoRealAuthenticator_ authenticates users defined in a MongoDB collection.

{: .bs-callout.bs-callout-info }
Mongo Realm Authenticator is suggested for production usage.

The configuration allows:

-   defining the collection to use (`users-db` and `users-collection`), the properties of the user document to use as user id, password and roles (`prop-id`, `prop-password` and `json-path-roles`).
-   enabling hashed password using the strong bcrypt hashing algorithm (`bcrypt-hashed-password` and `bcrypt-complexity`); note that the password is automatically hashed on write requests and that the password property is automatically removed from responses.
-   allows initializing the users collection and the admin user if not existing. See `create-user` option.
-   allows controlling the users caching.

```yml
authenticators:
    mongoRealmAuthenticator:
        users-db: restheart
        users-collection: users
        prop-id: _id
        prop-password: password
        json-path-roles: $.roles
        bcrypt-hashed-password: true
        bcrypt-complexity: 12
        create-user: true
        create-user-document: '{"_id": "admin", "password": "$2a$12$lZiMMNJ6pkyg4uq/I1cF5uxzUbU25aXHtg7W7sD2ED7DG1wzUoo6u", "roles": ["admin"]}'
        # create-user-document.password must be hashed when bcrypt-hashed-password=true
        # default password is 'secret'
        # see https://bcrypt-generator.com but replace initial '$2y' with '$2a'
        cache-enabled: false
        cache-size: 1000
        cache-ttl: 60000
        cache-expire-policy: AFTER_WRITE
```

### File Realm Authenticator

_fileRealmAuthenticator_ defines users credentials and roles in a simple yml configuration file.

```yml
authenticators:
    fileRealmAuthenticator:
        enabled: true
        conf-file: ./etc/users.yml
```

See [users.yml](https://github.com/SoftInstigate/restheart/blob/master/core/etc/users.yml) for an example users definition.

## Token Managers

### Random Token Manager

**rndTokenService** generates an auth token using a random number generator. It has two arguments, `ttl`, which is the tokens Time To Live in minutes, and `srv-uri` the URI of the service that allows to get and invalidate the user auth token.

```yml
token-manager:
    rndTokenManager:
        enabled: true
        ttl: 15
        srv-uri: /tokens
```

{: .bs-callout.bs-callout-info }
Watch [Authenticators in RESTHeart](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVk0aboHayM&t=1211s)
